Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Serene Kader. She's professor
of philosophy and Women's and gender studies at the
CUNY Graduate Center and she also holds the Jane
Newman Chair. In philosophy of culture at Brooklyn College,
and today we're going to talk about her book
for feminism, Why We Fall for White Feminism and
how we can stop. So Serene, welcome to the
show. It's a huge pleasure to
everyone. Uh, IT'S a huge honor to be here.
Thank you so much for having me, Ricardo.
No, it's completely my pleasure. So, um, let's start
perhaps here with a few definitions. Also because in
this particular case, I know that there's a variety
of forms of feminism and feminists identify in different
ways and So on. So, uh, what is feminism?
How would you define it?
So I think that the best definition of feminism
is really the one that Bell Hooks offered in
the 1980s, which is that feminism is opposition to
sexist or gender-based oppression. But in order for that
definition to make sense, we also have to have
in mind. A kind of clear understanding of what
oppression is. Um, AND I think, um, the philosopher
Marilyn Fry kind of crystallizes this really well also
in the 1980s, saying oppression is a set of
social conditions where you have structures that put some
groups of people above other people. And so, I
think this is the right way to look at
feminism. But a lot of the book, and as
you can kind of see from the title is
about partly controversy. Over this definition. And so a
lot of the book is about controversies um over
this definition or over definitions of feminism in general
and how if we work with the wrong definition
of feminism, or if we have the wrong definition
in the back of our heads, we can end
up with policies that end up um being very
harmful to groups of women or that don't actually
succeed in overcoming oppression. And one of the things
I want to say in The book is that
many of us have today kind of in the
backs of our heads, that what feminism is about
is freeing individual women from social expectations. And I
think that idea, um, even though it seems like
a good idea to many of us when we
talk about, you know, not wanting to do what
we're told, resisting our programming, like, these ideas are
very intuitively appealing and popular, but A lot of
what the book shows is that they on their
own, are not going to liberate, um, all women
and gender diverse people, and also that sometimes they
end up harming groups of us.
Right. Uh, SO I would also like to ask
you about the waves of feminism. Uh, COULD you
characterize the 12, 3rd, and now people also talk
about the 4th wave of feminism because sometimes, you
know, I hear from people, or I mean, um,
lots of times it's more from people who are
not very fond of feminism that, uh, I mean,
from the 3rd wave onwards, it's Obsolete out of
the, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So, so tell
us about
them. Yeah, so I will say something about the
waves, but before I do, I also want to
share that my perspective is a little bit anti-describing
feminism in terms of waves. I think the right
way to think about it is that this set
of ideas, um, about resisting the oppression of women
and gender diverse people have been active at many
places and many times, and different groups of people
have often had different priorities. So, I think even
if you look at the 20th century in the
United States, which is really where the story about
the waves is supposed to come from. You will
see that different groups of women were organizing with
different priorities and different timelines. So, some books I
really like to recommend about this are Paula Gidding's
When and Where I Enter, Bonita Roth's Many Roads
to Feminism, and, um, A book by several authors
called, um, Feminism Unfinished. These books all tell a
story about what was going on in the 20th
century that are through the eyes of non-elite white
women, but who were organizing. So, for example, in
Feminism Unfinished, you hear that women in the labor
movement were organizing throughout the 20th century, um, for
things like paid parental leave, um, And fair wages,
or you learn from um books about women of
color feminisms that uh opposing racism and feminism together
was always a central idea, or that the idea
that you were oppressed by being excluded from the
workforce didn't really make sense when you were a
poor woman who had to work outside the home
in order to Um, make money, or you were
not oppressed by being put on a pedestal like
a Victorian delicate person, when in fact, if you
were a woman of color, you were thought of
as a use object or a savage, right? So,
this is all to say that I think that
the wave image. IS not that helpful in describing
the history of feminism. And so much of my
book is about the idea that there are many
strands of feminism. They've been all around us in
different places. Which one do we want to pick
up? And so, I think the waves image, which
I will explain now, um, really encourages us to
think that there's one feminist movement and that the
priorities of one group of women define what feminism
can be about. So what's the wave image? It
basically tells us that there were Really, people only
agree about the first two. They agree that kind
of in the early 20th century, we had a
movement focused on things like suffrage, um, access to
women's education, women's access to the professions, and so
on. And then in the second wave, um, that
there was a focus more on sort of, uh,
uh, we see the advent of radical feminism. And
a focus on sort of cultural manifestations, um, and
material manifestations of women's oppression that have to do
with subjugation, especially, but not exclusively subjugation around sexuality.
So, in the second wave, um, and also subjugation
around, um, housewifery, which already kind of speaks to
the interests of a certain class of women, right?
Only, only a certain subgroup of women have ever
been able to be housewives. And so, in the
second wave, we start seeing people say like, politicizing
things like rape, um, and, and, um, talking about
marriage as an institution that um is inherently or,
or that has historically been oppressive. So, Those are
kind of the, the first wave and the second
wave. And then whether there were third or fourth
waves are topics of disagreement. Um, IF people talk
about the third wave, um, people often talk about
it as something that arose sort of when I
was a child, like in the 90s as a
movement that kind of Actually, there's two ways of
describing the third wave. Some people describe the third
wave as a movement that says kind of, you
can be feminine and be a feminist. Um, SO,
like, it's OK to wear lipstick and be a
feminist. Some people describe the third wave as the
wave that brings in intersectionality and the idea that
feminism involves opposing oppressions like white supremacy, um, and
kind of rampant exploitative capitalism. Um, BUT I especially
resist that last characterization because I really want to
emphasize that women, Um, of color and working-class women,
they were organizing throughout all of the waves, um,
and they sometimes had different focuses, acting like women
of color kind of came into the picture when
the rest of the world discovered intersectionality misrepresents history.
And I don't really think there's a 4th wave.
Some people say the 4th wave is online. I
don't know. Um, WHAT do you? What have you
heard of as the,
uh, yeah, it's more or less along those lines
that it's online, uh, activism, let's say.
OK, I mean, I think that that's deceiving too
when we have seen such huge waves of mass
protest, especially like in the streets in the last
10 to 15 years. So I almost wonder if
the fourth wave idea, um. Almost precedes things like
the women's strikes that um we saw all over
the world in 2015 and 2016, or the movement
for Black Lives um at the um in the
2010s and 2020s. Um, I think it's kind of
a mistake to just, I'm a millennial, it's an
old millennial, but I think it's a mistake to
describe my generation's activism as mostly online, even though
it is on it online as well as in
other places.
So do you think that there are versions of
feminism that might be harmful to women?
Yeah, so there are definitely ideas that people that
think of as feminists that can be harmful to
women. So, I think one thing that's helpful here
is to kind of distinguish what I hope is
the true moral core of feminism from, um, actions
that people who have called themselves feminists have taken.
I think it is absolutely true that actions that
are taken by people who call themselves feminists have
been harmful. Um, AND even actions that have been
taken by people using definitions of feminism that are
different from mine, but don't seem totally off the
wall have been harmful to women. So, for example,
um, you might think of one of the ideas
that I criticize in the book that we'll talk
about more later is the idea that feminism is
about freeing women from backward cultures, right? Like, That
on its own, um, and for many people actually
seems like it's a good idea, right? Like, many
people think like religions are telling women that their
only job is to take care of children and
listen to men. Um, AND maintain a house. And
so wouldn't it be better, um, if we reduced
women's religious adherence. But as I go into in
the book, right, like, these are the justifications of
the US invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq, right? These
are the justifications of European far right parties, um,
consistent bans on hijab and other sorts of Islamophobic
practices. So, that's just one example, um, but I
think often, um, ideas that seem feminist can harm
other women. Another one that I talk about extensively
in the book is the idea that feminism is
about um allowing women to enter the paid workforce.
Um, OF course, many women, including me, right, like,
our lives are better. Because we are able to
do forms of work that we value besides um
care work, right? And I also do care work
as is manifest in my children's paintings being in
the background, but like, of course, I value that
I was able to get a PhD and be
a writer. But the If you only talk about
having women be able to enter the professions, and
you don't do something about the revaluing of care
work, what you actually have end up with and
have ended up with is this new class of
exploited, racialized, often immigrant women, whose job it is
to do the devalued work that facilitates women of
my social classes entry into the paid workforce. Um,
And isn't gonna liberate all women until we do
something about the care work problem in its own
right.
And what is it that you call white feminism
then?
So, um, white feminism is actually not my term.
And even though it's not in the title, it's
in the title, it's not really a term that's
that important to me. But white feminism in general
is a feminism that reflects the priorities of privileged
white women. Um. So, you might think of it
as a feminism that is really associated with individualism,
that is uncritical of things like the carceral state.
So I think one good example of white feminism
that we have seen a lot of action around
in the 2020s is like the idea that a
previous generation of often white feminists had that like,
um, Punishment through the carceral system for things like
intimate partner violence and rape was going to be
um the solution to these problems. And I think
one of the things that we have come to
understand is, I mean, that We have a lot
of critiques of the incarceral system around racism, but
also very specific to feminism that sometimes these policies
turn women of color, uh, you know, make women
of color more vulnerable because they are, for example,
likely to be criminalized when they make a call
about intimate partner violence in their home. Um, WHITE
feminism is also kind of about saving people in
a lot of cases, but like, it's the idea
that it's not just that the priorities of the
privileged group are correct, but also that the privileged
group is in a position to tell, um, like,
to decide what should happen to women with, um,
fewer opportunities and privileges or who are just, you
know, having a different kind of life. That's, I
think, what white feminism is. White feminism is in
the title of my book, even though it's not
as central of a concept for me, is that
I also think that the term white feminism has
just kind of started to function as a stand-in
for what I call feminism for the few. Um,
WHICH are various forms of feminism that promote the
interests of elite women at the expense of non-elite
ones. And what I try to do in the
book is to kind of say, uh, and I
coined this kind of idea of freedom feminism. I
want to say these bad forms of feminism are
actually united by a certain Value orientation, and that's
a value orientation toward individual freedom.
OK, so let's tackle then what in the book
you deem to be a series of myths regarding
feminism. So the first one is the freedom myth.
What is that about?
Yeah, the freedom myth is sort of what it
sounds like. It's the idea that we will achieve
the end of gender-based oppression or that feminism will
have succeeded if we reduce every individual woman's um
Uh, Sort of constraint by social expectations. So put
simply, feminism, freedom feminism, or the freedom myth is
the idea that feminism is about individual freedom and
that caring about individual freedom is the path that
will lead us to all of our liberation. Uh,
BY the way,
no, no, I, I was just wondering, uh, because
that's the freedom myth we're also going to, uh,
talk about the individualist myth and others. Um, WOULD
you think that a label such as liberal feminism
would also apply here instead of white feminism or
something equivalent to that?
Yeah, OK. I love this question. Thank you so
much for throwing it in because I often get
from sort of scholars of women's studies, the question
of why isn't this just a criticism of liberal
feminism? And I think this is an answer where
my training as a philosopher becomes very important, because
It could be a criticism of liberal feminism, depending
on how you define liberal feminism. But if you
go look at like definitions of liberal feminism, they
will sometimes say things like, uh, liberal feminism is
the idea that we should seek legal equality between
men and women. I don't necessarily think that's a
bad idea or the problem. It might be a
problem to think that's the only thing you should
do. Also, weirdly, liberal feminism is often defined as
a feminism that cares about equality. And that is
a real problem for me because a lot of
what I'm trying to do in the book is
say that um we need to actually resurrect a
kind of equality. So, I do think I'm criticizing
some of the things that people associate with liberal
feminism. But I think that being unclear about what
the definition of liberal feminism is, has been causing
a lot, a lot of problems. And I also
think that, and maybe this is very important, a
lot of the bad kinds of feminism, I point
out, can be held by people who are not
liberals and Um, I think the section on the
culture myth really shows that, like, lots of, like,
radical feminists or even Marxists, right? Like, believe that
culture is a source of women's oppression and we
should eradicate it. So, another reason that I am
not, Um, focused only on liberal feminism is that
I think, um, the vices of freedom feminism often
come from people who are not liberals too. And
so we shouldn't assume like, oh, I'm a socialist
feminist, or like, I'm a black feminist, so I
can never do freedom feminism. Like, I was, I
think, before this book, mostly known for my work
about the global South, and one thing I can
say, um, I think with relative authority is that
imperialist views about other women are kind of spread
among a variety of, of feminists with different other
beliefs, um, within the West.
How about the individualism myth, uh, explain that one.
Yeah, so the individualism myth, um, is basically the
idea that feminist progress can be counted in whether
individual women are doing better than they were doing
before. Um, AND there's a lot of problems with
this view. Um, BUT two of them are one,
that individual women can be doing better than they
were before. But still be more, like, but still
have their oppression reinforced, and I'll explain that in
a 2nd. AND 2nd, that, um, Improvements in the
situation of some women. DOES not translate into improvements
into the situa in the situation of all women.
So, I'll go through those two in turn. The
first one, which I think is a little bit
kind of harder to wrap your head around, is
the idea that women can be doing better than
we were doing before and also remain oppressed. Um,
THE example, and one reason that we can remain
oppressed is that if we don't think about what's
happening to men across the same time period, Um,
we will miss an oppression is a, right, it's
a relationship between social groups. So, what can be
happening is women can be doing better than they
were before, but be facing new kinds of harms
or be subordinated to men in new kinds of
ways. And I think that actually is the reality
for many women all over the world right now.
And I think, um, One, and I think there's
a lot of examples of this. I think we
can see a reaction to this in so many
Gen Z women's kind of saying, you know, you
hear about like love girls now, for example, like,
I don't want to be in a relationship with
men because what men have become. Uh, NOT all
of them, of course, but, but what many men
have become is not something that I want to
be involved with because there is the assent, for
example, of this, this form of masculinity for young
men that says, like, you know, I do think
I deserve sexual service from another person, right? I
do think I should be able to joke about
whether women should have the right to vote. I
don't know if this got coverage in Portugal, but
this is a real thing. One of Trump's former
staffers. Um, MADE a joke about whether we should
repeal the 19th Amendment, which is the amendment that
gives women the right to vote in the United
States. And, you know, this is what men on
the right are joking about now. So, I digress
a little, but I just want to say that
You know, this trend in Gen Z is young
women intuitively understanding something that is really going on,
which is that in many ways, women's lives are
better, but also men have privileges that they didn't
have before or are trying to seek them. A
more kind of data-based um example of that is
the phenomenon the late geographer Sylvia Chan referred to
as the feminization of, um, responsibility and obligation. And
Chan um studied women all over the global South,
and one of the trends that she found all
over the place is, OK, women have more access
to income. And that does make our lives better
in a bunch of ways, right? Like, it is
better to be able to leave your abusive husband.
It is better to have enough food to eat,
right? Like, we're not going to challenge those claims.
But on the other hand, You saw and see
new forms of oppression of women or men claiming
new prerogatives. So, now, women are just working more
across the board than we were working before. Like,
you're doing your care work and you're doing your
work outside the home, or, um, Men are claiming
an ability to benefit from women's work that they
weren't claiming before. So, in the South, you see
all these cases, um, I think this is a
very kind of classic and clear-cut case where, you
know, there are user fees for children's schools and
where historically, it's like, Um, It's part of if
only the man has income, it's the man's responsibility
to pay for user fees for schools. Now women
make an income, and now there's this shift to,
oh, women's money. IS for for children's school, men
have more money that they can use for gambling,
uh, and to purchase sex workers. So, the, um,
which is not, of course, true in every case,
but we need to be able to see these
kind of phenomena where women's lives can be getting
better, but men's men can be the ones who
are benefiting, and we won't see that. If we
only ask, our individual women better off than they
were. The second phase of the individualism myth that
maybe also I can talk about a bit more
with the other myths because it runs through the
book, um, is the idea that women can, um,
Improve their lives by throwing other women under the
bus. Or even if they're not throwing other women
under the bus by benefiting from the exploitation of
other women, and You know, we can talk about,
and I know we will talk about the more,
you know, funnier, egregious examples like girl bosses in
a minute, but also, I think, you know, talking
about my own situation. Part of what it is
to be um a woman in, like, the profession,
like in the classes in the United States where
you're going to the office or um are making
more than a certain amount of income. If you
have children, um, you are also in a situation
where your ability to do what you want to
do kind of depends structurally on the exploitation of
other women, right? Like, the The who has taken
care of my children professionally, like, well, that's an
industry dominated by immigrant women, women of color who
are paid not very well. And also, I mean,
to help people understand the responsibility here, I think
I differ from a lot of people who are
critical of this and that like, I don't necessarily
put the blame on individual moms of the Um,
professional classes, because it's also the case that, like,
many people like me couldn't afford what it would
take, um, on our own to have non-exploitation of
women who are care workers. But there's also a
simple solution to this, and it's also a sign
of a social failure, right? Like, society should be
investing in this work and treating it as valuable.
And then this trade-off for, um for women would
no longer be um as salient, and most importantly,
because the, the trade-off for women of the professional
classes is important, but much more important is the
basic livelihood and rights and well-being of the women
who are doing this devalued work.
And then we also have the culture myth you,
you've already touched a little bit on it earlier,
but tell us more about it.
Yeah, the culture myth is the idea that culture
and tradition are impediments to women's liberation. Um, I
talked about Islamophobia in some of the previous examples,
and I think this is a classic place where
we see it, right? Like, almost every time that
Muslim women come into the picture, what we hear
is that Um Well, these women are very oppressed.
The reason they're very oppressed is that there is
a set of religious traditions that oppresses them. So
the solution has to be for them to become
less tied to these traditions and groups and be
and adopt um the lifestyle of contemporary Western culture.
It's also not only an Islamophobia, right? Like this
is shot through the history of Western colonialism. So,
you'll see, for example, like false historiographies about indigenous
women that will um talk about how severe the
oppression of indigenous women at the hands of indigenous
men was prior to colonialism, when in fact, um,
You see in indigenous North American cultures, a wider
range of gender roles and um um greater appreciation
for gender equality than in almost any cultures you
might find. Also, today, for example, you'll hear people
talk about sexual assault of native women and leave
out that native women are most likely to be
raped by non-indigenous men. Um, OR, um, another example
that kind of, I, I,
I think, uh, sorry for interrupting, but I think
that another, another great example is, uh, also how,
uh, Western colonization almost tried to annihilate, uh, matriarchal
societies,
for example, yeah, no, and I think that's a,
I mean, a very good kind of summary of
it and not just try to annihilate it, but
pretend that they don't exist, right? Like I,
like, because there are still some of them out
there.
Yes, or that they never existed, right? I think
in the Western imaginary and like according to what
I call the Enlightenment teleological narrative in the book,
right? Like, what is the past of humanity or
what are the cultures of brown and black people?
Oh, well, those cultures are ultra patriarchal cultures that
they need to evolve out of. But that's not
the reality. And also, I mean, to be clear,
there are cases where we Experience ultra patriarchal cultures
and context, but even in those, like, it's not
obvious that like ending the culture or ending the
religion is the solution, because, and there's a number
of reasons for that, but like, one is that
All cultures and religions have multiple strands, right? It's
a mistake to say that like what Islam is,
is what the Taliban says it is, right? Like,
obviously, yeah,
because through throughout history and even now there are
progressive versions of Islam, for example, exactly,
exactly. And I mean, historically, if we want to
talk about history, like the status of women in
the Middle Ages in Islam was superior in many
ways to the status of women in Europe. So
it's complicated in ways that the culture myth really
doesn't let us see. The culture myth, also, I
should add one thing, um, is It part of
why it's so dangerous is that it obscures the
reality of imperialism. And this is very much in
my mind since, you know, we're talking a couple
days after the US um Uh, removed Maduro from
power in Venezuela. Um, SO, it feels very important
to talk about the omnipresence of imperialism right now.
Um, BUT, The culture myth lets people in the
West and in the north say this, well, like,
What is the rest of the world like? The
rest of the world is backward and regressive, right?
And So, anything that the West does to those
places can only be beneficial to the people in
those places. Now, that misses a lot of things,
but one of the deep things that talking about
culture misses is that it misses that sexism in
many places is often a result of imperialism, not
a result of an unchanging culture that was kind
of always there. The Afghanistan example, I think is
a very like the the examples of both Afghanistan
and Iran, I think are kind of clear cut
examples of this where US imperialism played a role
in retrenching gender conservative understandings of Islam that would
not necessarily have been the dominant ones if not
for US involvement in the region,
right. Um, AND then you also talk about in
the book, you also talk about the restriction myth.
Uh, WHAT is that about?
So the restriction myth is the idea that the
harms of sexism or the harms of gender-based oppression
can be understood as, um, restrictions, right? Like always
things that hold you back or prevent you from
doing something. And what I really want to push,
and this is another kind of place where my
training as a political philosopher feels really important, is
that we really have to see that there are
harms of sexism that take the form of inequalities,
not restrictions. Um, Some harms are just fundamentally about
some people having more and some people having less,
and we won't see that um if we just
are looking for restrictions. And an example of that
that I offer in the book that I think
is pretty compelling is the example of what's called
the orgasm gap, um, which is, um, It's kind
of two things. It's the fact that in sexual
encounters between men and women, um, men are much
more likely to have an orgasm than women, and
it's also kind of used to refer to the
fact that the sexual act is defined as being
around male orgasm, right? Like, The, the act has
failed if um there has the men haven't had
an orgasm, or if somebody in, in the best
scenario, if both people haven't had an orgasm, but
even in that case, right? Like one of the
questions you might want to ask is, is the
obsession with orgasm even like itself, a male-centered way
of looking at sex. So, I bring this up
to say, We clearly live in a moment that
is less restricted around sexuality than the moment that
I grew up in, and certainly the moment that
our parents grew up in, right? Like, the, you
know, our parents grew up in a time, or
at least mine did, when, you know, premarital sex
was like, Like, not acceptable, right? People engaged in
it, but you wouldn't talk about it, you would
judge people for it. You know, we live in
an age where pornography is very widely available. We
live in an age where, and of course, this
is a good thing, like, there's a, a variety
of like more recognized, so like sexual practices, um,
and identities. So, yeah, we have in a certain
ways, a lot more sexual lack of restriction than
we had, and in a lot of ways that
has been good. But what is it all for,
or like, has it succeeded if that lack of
restriction is still like, OK, now this group of
young women who wants to have sex with men
are less restricted, but they still cannot expect that
their partner will care about their pleasure, like, To
me, this is an example of a problem that
is like, we won't see what's wrong if we
don't see that sometimes what we have to care
about is inequality, the idea that some people's pleasure
matters more than other people's.
Mhm. Uh, AND finally, and before we move on
to other topics, you also talk about the judgment,
uh, myth.
Yeah, so the judgment myth um is basically the
idea that Um, We should never, that it's, we
should never judge choices that women make or that
feminism is about respecting women's choices. Um, THIS too,
I think is an idea that on its own
sounds like a good idea. It's also a response
to something that's very real, which is like the
savior vibe in historical feminism that I talked about
earlier, like, it's a response to the fact that
women in privileged positions like to kind of punch
down and tell, um, sex workers, for example, that
they're making the wrong choice. Um, OR it's also
a response to the fact that people like to
criticize working moms, people like to criticize stay at
home moms. It's not in a certain way like
this, we don't want to criticize these choices for
a bunch of reasons, but one of them is
that people are making them from a very limited
menu. So, I understand why this don't judge women
thing is here, but there are two problems with
it. One problem is just that refusing to judge
each other isn't a political agenda, right? Like, it's
a recipe for stepping back, focusing all our attention
on saying, you do you, instead of focusing our
attention on developing the agenda that will actually Produce
change. And one of the things I try to
say in the book is this judgment obsession is
actually a product of like a deliberate right-wing attempt
to turn women on each other instead of like,
having us be able to make a political agenda
together. So, I talk in the book, for example,
about how the mommy Wars were really a product
of the campaign against the Equal Rights Amendment that
tried to tell women, oh, like, feminists hate you
if you're a stay at home mom, when the
reality was, well, the right is not fighting for
um things like wages for stay at home moms,
feminists were, even if many of them were not
themselves stay at home moms. Um, Second problem with
The judgment myth or the idea that feminism is
just about respecting other people's choices, is that I
do think we have arrived at a time where
it is sometimes important to judge women in positions
of privilege. It's not in every case, and I
brought up already the ways in which kind of
I unchosenly benefit from the exploitation of care workers.
Um, But there are cases, especially now, where women
in positions of privilege use this don't judge me
thing in order to like to justify and not
be criticized for what are flagrant, you, you know,
senses of disregard for other women, and that is
so on the rise as we see the rise
of right-wing women. And we watch kind of a
global slide toward fascism. Women on the right love
to say, you know, in the book, I focus
more on the girl boss, but right now, I
mean, we're in a slightly different political era. The,
like, one example in the states is that um
there's a senator from South Carolina, Nancy Mace, um,
Who is a absolutely a conservative right-wing woman. She
is also um a woman who broke a lot
of personal barriers, right? Like she went to the
Citadel, which was historically an all-male military academy. She
doesn't like let people tell her to be silent,
right? Like, so she has elements of feminism and
has benefited from feminism. How does she use that?
She uses, like, one of her main agendas has
just been to constantly deride and try to deny
the rights of trans women. So she did things
like put a um a biological sign in front
of the word woman in the Capitol bathroom and
take a picture of herself with it. And then
whenever somebody criticizes her, she says things like, I'm
not gonna let a man tell me what to
do, right? Like, so, to me, this is a
clear example of a case where a woman is
weaponizing the don't tell me what to do, don't
judge me framework to throw other women under the
bus, and I think we should criticize Nancy Mace
for um For violating the rights of trans women
so heavily and trying to kind of fracture them
from the rest of the feminist movement.
OK, and so what I, I guess that's related
to that in a way, what do you make
of the idea of girl bosses?
Yeah, um, so, I make of the idea of
girl bosses that On one hand, they really speak
to something important and good, which is the way
that feminism of a certain type really has permeated
the culture um of Women who are under a
certain age, right? Like, now, like, part of why
the girl boss became popular is that in a
certain way, we have succeeded in raising a couple
generations of women who don't want to be told
what to do, who think that they do have
a right to do things that people told women
they couldn't do before. And yet, The Girl boss
speaks to the success of, like, one quarter of
feminism or one side of feminism, and leaves out
another important side, and it shows us how feminism
can go wrong if it only tackles sort of
one part of the agenda. So, what's missing from
Girl boss, among other things, is an understanding of
and value for caring work and work that has
been traditionally assigned to women. So, what the girl
boss basically says is, you can go take no
prisoners, be really successful, make all this money, you
know, whatever. But The reality is that um if
you are going to actually have that life for
many people, especially if you're gonna have children, that
is going to depend on labor of other people.
Um, THAT who take care of your children, in
many cases, like, right, of the ones who are,
you know, the examples like Rachel Hollis that I
talk about in the book, right? Like she says,
there's a nice woman who comes in here and
cleans my house. I don't know her name, right?
Like, the, this is going to depend on On
labor that's devalued. Also, if you don't depend on
that labor, you can't be a girl boss and
have children, right? Like, so, because literally, there are
only so many hours in the day, you can't
take no prisoners all day in the office and
have, like, what's happening to your children. Or if
you're working an 80 hour work week or something,
um, literally, like, how are you gonna do these
other things that are necessary for reproducing life? So,
I think what is really defining of the girl
boss is this devaluation of women's labor, and it
kind of shows us the downside of focusing on
bringing of individual women into the workforce, um, without
focusing on the need to revalue and redistribute care
labor. If you only do that one side without
the other side, Huge numbers of women are going
to be um exploited, and also even for the
girl boss herself, right, like, she's not the one
I feel the most sorry for, but even the
women at the top echelons do more caring labor
in their households, do more mental load than their
analogous men. So this isn't, it's not a path
out. Also, I'll say another kind of related, but
not identical problem with the girl boss. It's just
that it's too obsessed with labor. And so I
think one thing that has been kind of interesting
to see emerge in the late girl boss, post-girl
boss place is anti-work feminism, bimbo feminism, these, um,
which I mean, bimbo feminism is a, I mean,
even that is a little bit outdated, but these
are all reactions also to the idea that the
way to express your feminism is to work and
to work harder, right? Like, This is, I mean,
why is it the case that the way that
you have to demonstrate that you deserve equality and
that you're an equal member of society or you
don't deserve to matter less is to prove that
you can work harder than everyone else.
Yeah, and maybe be exploited by your boss.
Yeah, exactly, right, like, and this goes to sort
of one of the old standing feminist and socialist
critiques of um a certain bad kind of equality,
right? Like, great is what we want, I mean,
want to be as exploited as like men have
been in the capitalist wage relation. Not really.
So, uh, yeah, that, I think that makes a
great segue to my next question because I actually
wanted to ask you, in what ways do you
think that these ideas intersect with, uh, capitalism, the
economic system we live in? I mean, uh, because,
uh, there's also, or at least in your book
I read about this term neo-liberal feminism, so tell
us about that.
So I think they intersect super heavily with capitalism
and particularly the form of capitalism that we live
under now, like, The The whole idea that what
freedom consists in is not being told what to
do or in freeing yourself from other people's expectations,
that's a really narrow understanding of freedom, um. It's
the understanding of freedom that prevails best in capitalist
societies, right? Like, and in sort of unrestricted capitalist
societies, that's it, like, well, like, just like freedom
for the market is not having the state intervene
in the market or not having the state tell
businesses what to do. What our individual freedom consists
in is not having other people tell us what
to do. There are also like other kinds of
deep material connections between capitalism and The kind of
feminism that I, that has caused problems. So, um,
The this whole problem about care work arises partly
from the fact that, you know, capitalism uprooted people
from extended kinship worker kinship, um, situations that used
to provide care and not foist it all on
individual women. Um, SO whereas it might have been
in the past that you can, you know, drop
your kids off at grandma's house next door or
grandma lives with you, like this is no longer
the reality for the majority of workers in the
West, um, so I think there's a lot of
connections in terms of neoliberal feminism specifically. So, neoliberal
feminism is associated with the idea that working on
yourself is a way that you express feminism, and
that kind of speaks to It speaks to neoliberalism
in a couple of ways. It speaks to how
work and work talk is supposed to now pervade
every domain of your life, right? Like, you're supposed
to be a good worker, not just in the
factory or in the office or in the restaurant
or wherever you happen to work. You're also supposed
to show that you're a disciplined worker by making
sure that you have the appropriate skincare routine and
going to the gym 10 number of times. So,
um, I definitely think that neoliberal feminism is a
face of freedom feminism, um, but I don't think
we should sort of reduce freedom feminism to that.
Um, AND I think one of the reasons that
we shouldn't reduce freedom feminism to that is that
we can see, um, bad forms of feminism operating
even as neoliberalism declines because I think one of
the things that we are seeing globally right now
is that neoliberalism may actually no longer be the
order of the day, right? Like we may be
living under a different type of capitalism. Um, One
that um That is not as obsessed with individual
discipline and work on the self and is more
racialized, for example, so that like, no matter how
hard, if, if we, if, if we return to
kind of more old style racist social arrangements, the
idea that working on yourself is going to make
you worthy is going to decline in popularity, um,
if you are not a white woman, for example.
Right,
yeah, it reminds me of those kinds of talks.
And narrative surrounding self-improvement and personal responsibility, right, as
if people are not in a particular socio-cultural economic
context that limits what they can do even to
a certain extent.
Exactly. Or like if you just celebrate choice under
these conditions where your choices are really limited, like,
uh, uh, you could be choosing, and I think
this is a really central thing in the book
and in all my work, like you could be
choosing the best option on your menu if your
menu sucks, like. Then the only solution is to
change the menu, and your individual choices are never
going to change the menu. Collective action is what
changes the menu, and that means also caring about
people who are not like you and stopping thinking
of your feminism as only about like, oh, my
victory is a victory for all women, or I'm
gonna set an example and I'm done.
Mhm. Uh, TELL us now about intersectionality. I mean,
what is it? What is intersectional feminism and why
do you think it matters?
So, intersectionality is a term that, um, the black
feminist legal theorist Kim Crenshaw coined, um, in the,
I think either 1989 or 1990, so, um, right
around there, um, but The basic idea behind intersectionality
is the idea that there are multiple axes of
oppression. So you have racism, you have sexism, you
might have others, right? Like you might have homophobia,
you might have capitalism. But that for people who
face multiple oppressions, these axes will intersect in their
lives that will make them face qualitatively distinct forms
of oppression, such that you won't be able to
tell, like, you won't be able to just separate
out, this was the racism and this was the
sexism. So Crenshaw uses this great example of a
person, I mean, a very upsetting example too, but
of a black woman who was hit by two
cars, um, and sustained, and they're coming from opposite
directions, but you cannot look at her body and
say, well, this injury came from this car, and
this injury came from this car, right? Like, the
injuries now are kind of enmeshed with each other.
And so, That insight um is important partly because
it's about how, um, She focuses on advocacy discourses,
but advocacy and movements that try to focus on
only one thing at a time, right? Like, I'm
gonna focus on gender only, or I'm gonna focus
on race only, can end up actually just not
addressing at all the forms of oppression that people
who um occupy both of the categories. Um, EXPERIENCE,
right? So, like, um, Part of the oppression of
being a black woman that I sort of talked
about earlier is not about being excluded from work,
right? Like, it's about being expected to work too
much all the time for not enough, right? Like
historically in the United States for nothing because that's
the history of slavery. But also, I mean, being
expected to work for less money than other people,
being sequestered in jobs that are um Less well
paying than those of other people. So, we need
to be able to see those kinds of situations
and organize against them. And part of why intersectionality
is important, and of course, there's a million reasons,
but is that it makes clear that sometimes to
end sexist oppression, like, we're going to have to
fight against other oppressions too, right? Like, there is
the basic upshot of a feminism that says, like,
I'm only going to care about gender. One thing
is, like, that might not even make sense because,
like, what is, like, If gender on its own
doesn't exist, like, what are we focusing on, then
what it often means de facto is I'm only
gonna focus on the gender oppression of elite women
or the form that it takes for elite women.
And then you can do that, but then you
will miss, like, the point isn't just that you'll
miss racism or you'll miss class exploitation. The point
is that the gender oppression that working class women
face, or that queer women face, or that women
of color face is enmeshed with these other things.
So if you don't also fight the other thing,
you won't be able to get rid of the
gender-based oppression in their life.
Mhm. Uh, I would like to ask you now
because this is another question that you explore in
your book. Is tradition the enemy of feminism?
I think the answer to that is no. Um,
AND uh that's one of the big points I
want to bring home in the culture myth. Um,
THE part of the problem with the idea that
feminism is about opposing tradition is that it misses
the fact that sometimes we can make new feminisms.
By drawing on traditional ideas or by um reconceiving
our traditions. So, we talked about progressive versions of
Islam before. Um, I think one example is that
women of all kinds of religions, um, will often
find In their historical traditions, um, ideas that are
supportive of gender equality. And actually, I'll add something
that I haven't said about this before that your
question about neoliberalism, Ricardo really brings to light. Like,
OK, I think it's also like, We are. In
an era where our moral vocabulary is very evacuated
by capitalism. Um, AND so one of the reasons
that we might wanna, and not just capitalism, right,
by kind of Just a lack of value discussion
or a lack of exposure to sort of better
forms of life that we could lead together. One
of the valuable things about tradition is that it
can sometimes help us imagine things that we have
not seen, but we know might have existed in
the past, or we can. Um, FINE practices that
are not practiced by the majority, but actually exist,
you know, exist somewhere, or there's a vocabulary from
there somewhere. I think I use this example in
the book, but like, thinking about the variety of
gender roles in indigenous traditions, for example, is a
good, um, is a helpful example here, that it's
like people who um are transphobic or want us
to kind of return to extreme gender binarism, want
to pretend that there's no such thing as people
who, like, it's a new creation, that there's people
who don't fit the gender binary, and Um, obviously,
there's no form of collective, our whole form of
collective life will collapse if, um, they exist as
equals openly in our society. But one of the
things that we see from looking at pre-colonial societies
and, um, in many cases, is that actually, there
have been other forms of life where, um, gender
roles have been much more varied. Um, AND there
has been a lot of respect for individual flourishing,
and we don't have to invent that now, right?
Like that has existed. So, tradition can also be
a real source of power for our emotion and
moral imaginations when we're looking at the right traditions
or looking at them through the right lenses.
Yes, I was actually going to say because, and
I think this is something that we can learn
a lot from anthropology and the work that anthropologists
do, of course, and socio sociologists as well because
even what we mean by tradition, I mean, it's
sort of a socio-cultural construct because I mean, maybe
if you ask people in the West, oh what
is the tradition. FAMILY unit, they say, oh, it's
the husband, the wife, and the kids, and that's
it. But I mean if you go to and
look into more traditional societies, hunter gatherers, artticulturalists, and
so on, actually for the, for most of our
history as humans, as Homo sapiens, we've had cooperative
breeding. So I mean if you really want to.
Talk about tradition. That's, I guess what's traditional in
our.
Yes, no, I mean, I think about this all
the time. Like, I remember, I mean, this dates
me a little, but I remember when I was
kind of younger, and it was like same-sex marriage
was controversial in the United States, and people would
go around being like, marriage between one man and
one woman is the natural human norm. And it's
like, really? I mean, It seems clear that polygamy,
at least, has been like a major contender throughout
human history. You want to pretend that it doesn't
exist, or, to your point, you don't even have
to look that far back. This one man, one
woman, breadwinner caregiver, like, that's not even the norm
in the United States now, right? Like, It's our
idea, like it's an ideological construction of tradition. I
don't think it's ever been the case that the
dominant like family form is one man and one
woman.
And if it ever existed, it was only for
a very short period of time.
Exactly, yeah, I mean, if it did exist in
the post-war era or something like that, well, quit,
we all know now that it's economically untenable in
the world we live in today, unless you're very
wealthy, so here we are.
OK, so, uh, I have then just one last
question, and I mean this is not, uh, directly
about your book, but how do you look at
the current state of women's rights in the US
particularly? Um, IT'S terrible. But I'll say this. I
could say more about why it's terrible, but I
think more important is to remember that moments of
crisis are also moments of opportunity, and so, One
way we might look at the repeal of Women's
rights in these extreme, I,
I sorry, I said Roe v. Wade. I, I
thought you were, no, no,
I, that was what I was, yeah, I was
gonna say like we have the repeal of Roe
versus Wade, but like abortion is not constitutionally protected
anymore. But also we look at things like the
undermining of basic women's workplace protections. Now people joking
about repealing the 19th Amendment, right, like. These are
like horrifying things that mark like a new political
era that we should be worried about. On the
other hand, People are outraged. En masse in a
way that, um, you know, they may not have
been in previous historical moments. And so this also
might be a moment for mass movements around these
things that also sort of take on board the
insights of Um, feminisms that were not led by
elite women in the past. So, around abortion, for
example, like, I opened the book by saying, well,
one of the things that the right has really
done is taken advantage of the idea that abortion
is a choice because it's very easy to twist
that language to trivialize the importance of abortion. But
maybe now is the moment where we can talk
about abortion. As not just like an unfortunate choice
you might have to make, but as something that
is part of a broad package of things that
women and other people who can become pregnant need
in order to control their lives, right? And that
includes things like Um, abortion, it also includes things
like the right to parent, if you want a
parent. Um, IT includes, um, access to abortion, not
just the choice about whether to have one, and
I bring that up because Things have changed in,
like, in terms of what it's possible to organize
around since I was a child, for example. Like,
yes, we have seen these big legal losses, but
I remember when I was a kid, like, no
one would say the word abortion, right? Like, if
people were pro-choice, they wouldn't say the word abortion.
No, I think it's, it is not the, like,
dominant, um, position among Democrats or people who are
pro-choice, that you should never say the word abortion
or that they're like, that it, um, that there
are not good reasons people might choose to have
abortions. So, I think this is a moment where
the situation of women's rights is very dire, but
the opportunities for organizing are very real, and there's
a very real base of people who is energized
around issues like reproductive rights and reproductive justice. I
also think on kind of a separate face of
feminism, because our rights on paper aren't. Everything. We
are in a really important moment where we stand
to be successful in organizing around care work. Um,
AND in a way, the ascendancy of the right
shows that, like, we, um, I think there's a
lot of places you can trace this, but I
wrote an article once saying this that I think
is an interesting way to look at it, which
is that The pandemic, among other things, like, really
blew the lid off the invisibility of care work,
right? Like, all of a sudden, people saw that
their colleagues' children were in their Zooms. Like, this
was no longer something that we were hiding from
public view. I think that now, the cat is
out of the bag. I'm, I'm mixing metaphors, and
you can't put it back in. That's part of
why you see the right wing ascendancy of trad
wives and um pro-natalism. And hopefully that won't be
the way this is negotiated, but I see an
opportunity, like, I, I, I see that that suggests
that, yeah, the cat's out of the bag, right?
Like the right is talking about trad wives because
the demand to see women's labor is now out
and insatiable. They're trying to funnel it into their
conservative agenda, but the energy is there ready to
be used for what it's really about. Which is
creating a form of life in which we value
this work that is central to everybody's life and
where we refuse to exploit um huge swaths of
the human race in order to make sure that
that work is provided.
Great. So, uh, the book is again for feminism,
why we fall for white feminism and how we
can stop. I'm of course leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Serene,
uh, apart from the book, where can people find
your work on the internet?
Um, I'm, my handle on Blue sky is at
Serene Carter, um, and they can also follow my
work at Serene Cotter.com.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
fascinating conversation.
It's been fascinating for me too. Thank you so
much, Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Sverggoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.